(hard rock music)
Back in videos nine and 10,
we looked at how we can size grid items by spanning them,
and we looked at how we can put them
where we want them to go
by using the track numbers where they start and stop,
or we just specifying where they stop,
or if they were to span across the entire grid.
Now there was a couple other ways
we can also both size and place our items,
and that is using something called grid template areas.
And that's giving specific names to areas on your grid.
So, first thing we wanna do is actually make some,
areas in our grids.
So I'm going to to make a quick grid.
I kinda wanna make your standard website
with a sidebar on the left and a sidebar on the right,
and some content in the middle,
and then a footer across the bottom.
So, that's going to be a, sort of,
a three-column grid.
So I'll say grid-template-column.
And I'm gonna say 1fr 500px 1fr,
and what that should do is
it'll give us this 500 pixel middle,
and then whatever's left on the left and the right,
will be taken up accordingly by the sidebars.
And then, let's flip on our dev tools here.
I also want to specify a couple rows.
So I'm going to say grid-template-rows,
and we'll have, let's say, 150px 150px, and 100px.
Good. So I've got a grid, sort of three by three here.
Now what I wanna do, is to actually name the areas.
I want this,
these two squares right here.
I want that to be sidebar-1.
These two squares I want to be sidebar-2.
This whole center column I wanna be called content.
And then the strip along the bottom
I want that to be called the footer.
So the way that we do that is,
it's actually kind of,
it kind of funny.
It's very explicit.
You simply just, sort of, like,
type it as if it were ASCIIs.
So we'll say grid-template-areas,
and then for each row, you give yourselves a set of quotes,
and then you just type the name of the area
that you wish for it to be.
So I'm gonna say sidebar-1 content sidebar-2.
And then, if I give that a save, you'll see now,
and make sure that you have your dev tools on,
and this, this one right here, Display area names.
You see that it starts to overlay it
with the name of this area.
It's called sidebar-1.
The name of this area is called sidebar-2,
and this area is content.
Good.
But I also want these areas as well.
So what you can do, and this is a bit funky syntax, as well,
is you do not,
put a comma, or anything like that.
You simply just put another set of quotes.
And this can all be done on one line.
In fact, some editors can catenate them like that.
But I like to put each one on it's own line,
and that will just kinda give me a visual
of what we're working with.
So if I give that a save now,
you'll see sidebar-1, sidebar-1,
sidebar-2, sidebar-2,
and content, content.
Good!
And then the last row I want
to just be footer footer footer.
And that will line up the footer all across the end.
If you ever have,
you want like a dead space,
like maybe you didn't want this to be anything,
you can just put a dot there,
and that will just leave it to be just a regular old spot
that you could use with the other methods that we've had.
But in our case,
I want it to be footer footer footer.
So it's kinda like, you can just, like,
look at this,
and you could see that you can visualize
what it will look like.
And some people will also use tabs,
so that it'll all nice line itself up.
That is totally doable as well.
Just so you can, sorta, visualize what's going on here.
Good.
Now, when I wanna place my items in these areas,
I don't have to worry about line numbers,
or anything like that.
I can just go ahead and grab on to,
let's do the footer first.
And you say grid-area: footer.
And then it will just both size it,
and place it where we want it to go.
We don't have to say how big it is.
We don't have to say where it's gonna go.
We simply just say that it is the footer,
and then it will go there.
It'll span it across the entire region.
So, let's do the rest now.
So, .item1 was grid.area, whoa!
Grid-area:, that was sidebar-1.
Good.
And then item2 was content,
and item3 was sidebar-2.
Beautiful.
Now it's all perfectly lining up where we want it to go.
And, now, the cool thing about that is
we could start to involve some media queries
that would simply just switch up what this would look like.
So, if I were to make a media query,
I can simply just redefine the template areas
as we need them.
So I'll select my container at once we hit 700 pixels,
and I'm just gonna say background: red.
Make sure this media query is actually working.
Let's hit 700 pixels. There we go, it's kicking in.
Good. I'm happy with that.
And, I can just redefine what my template areas are.
So I'm gonna take this.
I'm going to redefine it to be,
content content,
content,
sidebar-1 sidebar-1,
sidebar-2,
footer footer footer,
and now, as I get it smaller,
you'll see that the layout totally jumps,
and it will then put the content up top,
and I'm not totally doing this justice,
because I've used pixels here.
But if I was to use all fr units,
maybe, like, 10fr,
and then the rows would each be,
the rows doesn't matter, actually.
There we go.
As it gets smaller, the content will jump up top,
and the sidebar values go right down below it,
and then the footer is still exactly where I want it.
So, sometimes,
the only thing you need to do in your media queries,
is simply just redefine what the layout looks like,
and everything will sort of snap to.
And in this case, I could also redefine more columns,
where if you wanted sidebar-1 and sidebar-2
to both have four,
I could use these values up here to define even more.
So, that is grid template areas.
It's pretty neat.
Not everybody loves the idea behind making ASCII,
but it sure is a lot nicer than having to remember
exactly what the columns are,
because if you were to ever change the number columns,
it doesn't really matter in this case.
So, we're in really good shape.
Other than that,
we've got some other ways to place and size our stuff,
and then we'll get into that into the next video.
All right, let's switch over to another example,
and that is understanding that,
when you create grid areas,
you also get line names for free,
which is pretty neat.
So, open up area-line-names-START,
and I've just got a whole bunch of numbers here.
And, what I want to do,
is actually make a grid
without defining any columns or rows.
We're simply just going to make the grid
with the grid,
we're simply just going to make the grid with the grid area.
So we'll say grid-template-area,
and I'm gonna go on the new line,
and in this case, I'm going to use an emoji poop.
Whoa!
Two, three, four.
I'm gonna do, yeah, I'll do four poops,
and four hamburgers.
Two, three, four hamburgers.
And then I'll just duplicate that over four times.
Good. Give that a save.
And, I spelt template wrong.
And, something's wrong.
Grid-template-areas, with an S on the end! Good.
So, if I turn on my dev tools now,
you'll see that, (laughs)
we have emojis overlapping where all of the actual areas go,
and it's just pretty neat.
And, if you wanted to, you could do something like,
.item3, I'm gonna say grid-area:, poop,
and that will just cover the entire poop area.
Actually, what is interesting about this is, tell me,
tell me what is happening here,
where we just made eight across, and four down,
and we have not enough room,
because we've got more items than we have space for.
So, what is happening here,
if I turn on the black lines,
is that we have, sort of, this explicit grid area for poop,
and explicit grid area for hamburgers,
and then as we are out of space, what happens?
Well, it automatically creates additional rows,
which are implicit, right?
I know I've gone over that over and over,
but it's really important that we understand that.
However, I do not wanna show you
how you can just place it in the poop area.
We want to show you
how you can actually these on named lines,
rather than just the numbered lines.
So, previously, we had done something like this,
like grid-column, and we did something like start at two,
and go until line five,
and that would span this item here.
Well, what's neat about that is
we can actually use line names,
like poop-start,
and we want to end it where poop-end,
and give that a save.
So what's happening here is
every time you have a grid area named anything,
and, before, it might be content or sidebar-1,
but in our case, it's poop, an emoji poop.
And then we can tack on a -start, or a -end,
and these are lines, and, unfortunately,
the dev tools doesn't show us the names of these lines,
but they are sort of lines that come for free in the browser
by tacking on a -start and a -end into the grid area.
So, in here, what I've done, is I've said,
start where the poop starts,
and end where the poop ends, right?
I could also do something like this,
where hamburger-end, and give that a save,
and you could see, it starts where the poop area starts,
and ends where the poop area ends.
And similarly, if I went to the grid row,
I could just say grid-row-end,
if I only wanna end where the poop ends,
then it's going to move it down.
Why?
Because it is going to anchor it
at the bottom of our poop area,
and of course, it will spill into the hamburger area,
because of how wide that actual columns have gone.
So, you don't always have to use line numbers.
You can also use areas that you have created
in your grid template areas,
by using the, sort of,
implicit lines that come along for free,
by using -start and -end,
tacked on to whatever you named your grid template area.
(hard rock music)